.Dd June 17, 2026
.Dt TBLS 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm tbls
.Nd render tabular data
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl \-format Ar format
.Op Fl \-border Ar style
.Op Fl \-delimiter Ar char
.Op Fl \-no-header
.Op Fl \-null Ar string
.Op Ar file ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
reads CSV or TSV data from
.Ar file
arguments or standard input and renders it as a table on standard output.
Multiple file arguments are concatenated in order.
All rows must have the same number of fields.
.Pp
By default, the first row is treated as a header row and rendered separately
from the data rows.
.Pp
Text output applies ANSI color to header cells and border characters.
Color is disabled when
.Ev NO_COLOR
is set to any value or
.Ev TERM
is set to
.Dq dumb .
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl \-format Ar format
Output format.
One of
.Cm text ,
.Cm markdown ,
or
.Cm html .
Default:
.Cm text .
.Pp
Text output alignment for cells containing emoji or wide characters
depends on the terminal's rendering of character display widths.
For output that will be read outside an EAW-aware terminal \(em in a
text editor, a code block, or piped to another tool \(em use
.Cm markdown
or
.Cm html ,
where the renderer determines column widths independently.
.It Fl \-border Ar style
Border style for text output.
Ignored for
.Cm markdown
and
.Cm html
formats.
One of
.Cm ascii
.Pq + corners, - horizontals, | verticals ,
.Cm unicode
.Pq box-drawing characters ,
or
.Cm none
.Pq no border .
Default:
.Cm ascii .
.It Fl \-delimiter Ar char
Field delimiter character.
Use
.Cm tab
or a literal tab for TSV input.
Default:
.Sq , .
.It Fl \-no-header
Treat the first row as data.
By default the first row is a header row.
.It Fl \-null Ar string
Replacement string for empty cells.
Default: empty string.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Bl -tag -width Ds -compact
.It 0
Success.
.It 1
Invalid arguments.
.It 2
Input parsing failure.
.It 3
File access failure.
.It 4
Rendering failure.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Render a CSV file:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
tbls data.csv
.Ed
.Pp
Read from standard input:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
cat data.csv | tbls
.Ed
.Pp
Render as Markdown:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
tbls --format markdown data.csv
.Ed
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width NO_COLOR
.It Ev NO_COLOR
Disables ANSI color output when set to any value.
.It Ev TERM
Disables ANSI color output when set to
.Dq dumb .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Lk https://codeberg.org/duras/tbls
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Sergiy Duras <sergiy@duras.org>
